---
layout: paper
title: "Clozapine reverses hyperthermia and sympathetically mediated cutaneous vasoconstriction induced by 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy) in rabbits and rats."
image: /assets/images/papers/12867524.png
authors: W W Blessing, B Seaman, N P Pedersen, Y Ootsuka
ref: Blessing et al. 2003. J. Neurosci..
journal: "The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience <b>23</b>, 6385-91 (2003)"
doi: 
abbrev: "J. Neurosci. <b>23</b>, 6385-91 (2003)"
pub_year: 2003
---

<br />
<div data-badge-popover="right" data-badge-type="donut" data-pmid="12867524" data-hide-no-mentions="true" class="altmetric-embed"></div>

# Abstract

Life-threatening hyperthermia occurs in some individuals taking 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, ecstasy). In rabbits, sympathetically mediated vasoconstriction in heat-exchanging cutaneous beds (ear pinnae) contributes to MDMA-elicited hyperthermia. We investigated whether MDMA-elicited cutaneous vasoconstriction and hyperthermia are reversed by clozapine and olanzapine, atypical antipsychotic agents. Ear pinna blood flow and body temperature were measured in conscious rabbits; MDMA (6 mg/kg, i.v.) was administered; and clozapine (0.1-5 mg/kg, i.v.) or olanzapine (0.5 mg/kg, i.v.) was administered 15 min later. One hour after MDMA, temperature was 38.7 +/- 0.5 degrees C in 5 mg/kg clozapine-treated rabbits and 39.0 +/- 0.2 degrees C in olanzapine-treated rabbits, less than untreated animals (41.5 +/- 0.3 degrees C) and unchanged from pre-MDMA values. Ear pinna blood flow increased from the MDMA-induced near zero level within 5 min of clozapine or olanzapine administration. Clozapine-induced temperature and flow responses were dose-dependent. In urethane-anesthetized rabbits, MDMA (6 mg/kg, i.v.) increased ear pinna postganglionic sympathetic nerve discharge to 217 +/- 33% of the pre-MDMA baseline. Five minutes after clozapine (1 mg/kg, i.v.) discharge was reduced to 10 +/- 4% of the MDMA-elicited level. In conscious rats made hyperthermic by MDMA (10 mg/kg, s.c.), body temperature 1 hr after clozapine (3 mg/kg, s.c.) was 36.9 +/- 0.5 degrees C, <38.6 +/- 0.3 degrees C (Ringer's solution-treated) and not different from the pre-MDMA level. One hour after clozapine, rat tail blood flow was 24 +/- 3 cm/sec, greater than both flow in Ringer's solution-treated rats (8 +/- 1 cm/sec) and the pre-MDMA level (17 +/- 1 cm/sec). Clozapine and olanzapine, by interactions with 5-HT receptors or by other mechanisms, could reverse potentially fatal hyperthermia and cutaneous vasoconstriction occurring in some humans after ingestion of MDMA.

